Title: Integrated Exploration-Aware UAV Route Optimization and Path Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28654v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 01:32:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Integrated Exploration-Aware UAV Route Optimization and Path Planning 

Jimin Choi 1, Grant Stagg 2, Cameron K. Peterson 2, Max Z. Li 3

Abstract —Uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs) are increasingly used for exploration-driven monitoring in hazardous environ-ments such as disaster zones, contaminated sites, wildfire areas, and damaged infrastructure, where limited flight endurance must be allocated between visiting reported locations and gathering new information. In these settings, prior information regarding hazards is often incomplete, spatially imprecise, and subject to change during execution. For example, initial reports may identify a region where a hazard is likely to exist, but the actual hazard may be displaced, partially observed, or entirely unreported. We present an integrated exploration-aware UAV route optimization and path planning framework for hazard monitoring under uncertain and evolving prior information. The environment is represented as a spatial risk map, where each location has an associated belief of hazardous conditions. Reported hazards are modeled as uncertain regions of interest (ROIs) rather than confirmed target locations, requiring the UAV to inspect reported areas while also using its limited flight endurance to explore informative regions. The proposed method solves a vehicle routing problem over reported ROIs, augments the route with auxiliary pseudo-nodes to improve spatial coverage, allocates the remaining flight distance budget across route segments, and optimizes dynamically feasible B-spline trajectories for local exploration. During execution, UAV measurements update a grid-based belief map, and the remaining trajectory is replanned when new information and the remaining budget justify adaptation. Across 48 scenario configurations, online replanning improves average KL reduction by 15 .9%

over the offline optimized planner and 48 .6% over straight-line traversal. 

Note to Practitioners —This work is motivated by UAV moni-toring missions in which operators have imperfect information about where hazardous conditions may exist. In many field settings, such as disaster response, wildfire assessment, industrial inspection, or contaminated-site monitoring, reports may identify approximate areas of concern rather than exact hazard locations. A UAV therefore needs to visit reported areas while also using its remaining battery or flight-distance budget to search nearby or under-covered regions. The proposed framework addresses this need by combining route optimization and path planning. At the mission level, it computes a route through reported regions and adds auxiliary waypoints to improve spatial coverage. At the trajectory level, it allocates remaining flight distance to route segments and generates smooth, dynamically feasible paths that favor informative sensing. During flight, incoming measurements update the onboard risk map, allowing the UAV to revise the remaining path when new evidence suggests that the initial reports were incomplete or inaccurate. The framework is most  

> *This work was supported by NSF IUCRC Phase I: Center for Autonomous Air Mobility and Sensing (CAAMS) Award No. 2137195.
> 1Jimin Choi is with the Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA;

jiminch@umich.edu           

> 2Grant Stagg and Cameron K. Peterson are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602, USA;

{ggs24, cammy.peterson }@byu.edu 

> 3Max Z. Li is with the Department of Aerospace Engineering, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA;

maxzli@umich.edu 

relevant when prior reports are uncertain and when sensing along the path is valuable, not only sensing at fixed inspection points. Practical deployment would require integration with onboard perception, localization, communication, and safety constraints, as well as validation on hardware under application-specific sensing and regulatory requirements. 

Index Terms —UAV monitoring, vehicle routing problem, B-spline path planning, online replanning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAVs) are increasingly used for exploration-driven monitoring missions in which limited flight endurance must be allocated between visiting reported locations and gathering new information. These missions arise in applications such as disaster response, industrial inspection, environmental monitoring, and hazard detection, where UAVs provide rapid, flexible, and remote assessment capabilities [1], [2]. Hazard monitoring is a particularly challenging real-world instance of this problem. In environments such as disaster zones, contaminated areas, wildfire regions, and damaged infrastructure, human responders face significant risks or ac-cess constraints, and autonomous agents must reason over uncertain and evolving information. Recent work has explored a wide range of UAV-assisted monitoring strategies, including routing optimization, cooperative UAV networks, and data-driven search and tracking methods [3], [4], [5], [6]. A central challenge in hazard monitoring is that prior information about hazards is often incomplete, spatially im-precise, and subject to change during execution. In practice, reports may be provided by human operators, external sensing systems, or initial reconnaissance, and these reports typically identify regions of interest (ROIs) rather than confirmed hazard locations. Such ROIs must be inspected as they represent po-tentially high-risk areas, but they do not fully characterize the environment. Hazards may be mislocalized, partially observed, entirely unreported, or newly revealed during execution, re-quiring UAVs to balance the inspection of reported ROIs with the exploration of surrounding uncertain regions. This setting is especially important in monitoring missions where mission-relevant risk information evolves over time. For example, changing wind conditions may reveal new wildfire hotspots, damaged infrastructure may expose secondary hazards such as gas leaks or unstable structures, and contamination plumes may shift as additional measurements are collected. In such cases, new sensor measurements can reveal discrepancies between the initial prior and the sensed environment, requiring the UAV to adapt its remaining plan. Many existing UAV routing approaches model the moni-toring task as a vehicle routing problem (VRP) over a set of predefined targets [7]. While this formulation is useful for 

> arXiv:2605.28654v1 [cs.RO] 27 May 2026 2

ensuring that known locations are visited under operational constraints, it is not sufficient when the environment con-tains spatially distributed risk and uncertain reports. Treating reported locations as deterministic hazard points can lead to overly rigid plans that focus only on nominal inspection targets and neglect informative exploration elsewhere. A more appropriate representation is a continuous risk field over the environment, in which ROIs define an imperfect prior belief and UAV measurements are used to refine that belief during execution. Another limitation of many UAV monitoring methods is the separate treatment of routing and path planning. Rout-ing determines the sequence in which ROIs or targets are visited, whereas path planning generates dynamically feasible trajectories between them. Most existing studies address these problems independently, and only a limited number of works have attempted to integrate them [8], [9]. Even when routing and path planning are considered jointly, prior efforts often rely on predefined observation points or one-shot offline plans, leaving limited ability to adapt the path based on newly acquired risk information. This separation is problematic for hazard monitoring since the path flown between inspection locations can itself provide valuable sensing opportunities, especially when the initial ROI reports provide only an in-complete description of the risk field. A prior conference paper [10] presented an earlier bi-level UAV monitoring framework that integrated route optimization with risk-aware B-spline path planning for hazard exploration. The present work makes three substantive extensions beyond that framework. First, it replaces discrete hazard targets with uncertain ROI reports over a continuous risk field, allowing reported regions to represent spatially imprecise and incom-plete prior information rather than confirmed hazard locations. Second, it introduces streaming belief updates and online B-spline replanning during execution, so newly sensed or previously unreported hazards can influence the remaining trajectory. Third, it evaluates monitoring performance using risk field estimation metrics across hidden and mislocalized hazard scenarios. Together, these extensions yield an integrated framework that consistently accounts for the UAV’s limited flight distance budget across route optimization and path-level exploration. It combines ROI-constrained routing, edge-based pseudo-node route augmentation, edge-wise allocation of the remaining flight distance, belief-weighted trajectory op-timization, and online belief-driven replanning under imperfect and evolving information. Numerical experiments show that pseudo-node augmentation improves route-level spatial cover-age, and across 48 scenario configurations, online replanning improves average Kullback-Leibler (KL) reduction by 15.9% over the offline optimized planner and 48.6% over straight-line traversal. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. UAV Monitoring under Hazards and Uncertainty 

UAVs have been widely studied as autonomous monitoring platforms for disaster response, infrastructure inspection, envi-ronmental monitoring, and surveillance in hazardous environ-ments [1], [2]. Prior work has considered emergency-response UAV platforms [11], energy-constrained environmental moni-toring [12], cooperative sensing and disaster management [3], reinforcement learning for UAV monitoring under changing conditions [4], and adaptive robust monitoring under model uncertainty [13]. Surveys have also reviewed UAV monitoring and surveillance in uncertain, changing, or partially observed environments, including cooperative sensing, target search, tar-get tracking, and networked surveillance [14]. However, many existing approaches assume that targets, inspection locations, or monitoring regions are known in advance. This assumption is restrictive when reports are uncertain, spatially imprecise, or incomplete. Rather than treating prior reports as confirmed targets, our work models them as uncertain regions of interest and plans over a continuous risk field whose belief estimate is updated during execution. 

B. Route Optimization for UAV Monitoring Missions 

Route optimization is central to UAV monitoring since vehicles must visit multiple locations while satisfying flight-distance, battery, timing, and vehicle-availability constraints. Existing UAV routing formulations have incorporated en-durance limits, refueling depots, multiple depots, hetero-geneous vehicles, repeated trips, and revisit-period con-straints [15]. Representative studies include UAV routing with refueling depots [16], cooperative routing for heterogeneous air-ground vehicle teams [17], and multi-depot multi-trip UAV routing for post-disaster emergency response [7]. Routing has also been used for persistent surveillance, post-disaster inspec-tion, and infrastructure damage assessment [18], [19], [20]. However, most routing formulations assume a predefined set of locations to visit, which is limiting when hazard reports are uncertain or spatially imprecise and useful information may exist between reported regions. Our framework addresses this limitation by adding pseudo-nodes for broader spatial coverage and allocating marginal flight budget to route segments for downstream informative path planning. 

C. Informative Path Planning and Active Exploration 

Informative path planning and active sensing methods gen-erate trajectories that maximize information gain, reduce un-certainty, or improve estimates of unknown spatial fields [21]. These methods have been applied to environmental monitor-ing, search and tracking, mapping, and robotic exploration un-der motion and budget constraints. Representative approaches include branch-and-bound informative planning [22], Bayesian optimization for informative continuous paths [23], UAV ter-rain monitoring [24], and adaptive informative path planning using deep reinforcement learning [25]. However, informative planning methods are often studied separately from mission-level routing, with a fixed local region or prescribed start and goal locations. Our work connects mission-level routing and local informative planning by assigning edge-wise exploration budgets and updating paths online as the UAV’s belief field changes. 

D. Integrated Routing and Path Planning 

A smaller body of work has studied the integration of routing and path planning, recognizing that high-level route 3

decisions and low-level trajectory feasibility are coupled. For example, [8] studied integrated planning for route selection and motion feasibility, while recent work has considered combined routing and path planning formulations for un-crewed vehicles [9]. However, existing integrated routing and path planning approaches often remain centered on prede-fined targets, fixed observation points, or deterministic task specifications. As a result, they provide limited support for exploration-aware monitoring problems in which prior reports are uncertain, risk is spatially distributed, and newly collected measurements should influence the remaining trajectory. An earlier conference version of this framework combined route optimization with risk-aware B-spline path planning for UAV hazard exploration [10]. This paper is motivated by field settings such as wildfire assessment, disaster response, and contaminated site monitoring, where initial reports may only approximate the location and extent of hazardous conditions. We therefore extend prior framework to continuous risk field monitoring with imperfect ROI reports and online belief-driven replanning. III. C ONTRIBUTIONS OF WORK 

The contributions of this work are fourfold. First, we for-mulate UAV hazard monitoring as an uncertain ROI inspection and continuous risk field estimation problem, where reports are spatially imprecise and incomplete rather than confirmed target locations. Second, we develop a budget-consistent hierarchi-cal planning framework that couples ROI-constrained routing with informative trajectory optimization through edge-wise exploration and pseudo-node route augmentation. Third, we propose a belief-driven B-spline planning and online replan-ning strategy that updates a grid-based log-odds belief field from streaming UAV measurements and adapts the remaining trajectory based on belief changes and residual budget. Fourth, we validate the framework across 48 scenario configurations with varying risk fields, hidden hazards, and pseudo-node settings. The proposed online replanning method is compared with three baselines. Offline optimized planning executes the initially planned belief-weighted trajectory without adapta-tion. Lawnmower coverage uses the available path budget for systematic geometric sweeping. Straight-line traversal di-rectly connects route waypoints with minimal exploration. The results show that pseudo-node augmentation improves route coverage by 91 .6% over ROI-only routing, and online replanning improves average KL reduction by 15 .9% over offline optimized planning, 36 .3% over lawnmower coverage, and 48 .6% over straight-line traversal. IV. P ROBLEM STATEMENT 

We consider a UAV hazard monitoring mission over a bounded continuous spatial domain Ω ⊂ R2. The environment contains an unknown spatial risk field ptrue : Ω → [0, 1],where ptrue (x) represents the true probability or intensity of hazardous conditions at location x ∈ Ω. For example, 

ptrue (x) may represent the probability that a location contains wildfire activity, the normalized intensity of contamination, or the likelihood that damaged infrastructure poses a local safety risk. This field is used to support controlled simulation, measurement generation, and post-mission evaluation, but it is not known to the UAV during planning or execution. Instead, the UAV maintains and updates a belief field over the same domain. 0 200 400 600 800 1000   

> x [m]
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y [m]
> 0
> 12
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> ptrue
> Known true cluster
> Unknown true cluster
> Reported ROI center
> Fig. 1. Example of a hazard monitoring environment over a continuous risk field. Reported ROI centers provide noisy and incomplete prior information. Some hazard clusters may be spatially mislocalized or unreported and must be discovered through exploration.

Figure 1 illustrates the risk field representation used in this work. The continuous risk field may be induced by multiple spatially localized hazard clusters. The UAV receives a set of reported ROI centers, shown as orange diamonds, which provide partial and noisy information about the environment. Some reports correspond to underlying hazard clusters, shown as white circles, but the reported centers may be spatially displaced from the true cluster locations. Other hazard clusters, shown as red crosses, may be unreported and can only influ-ence the UAV’s plan after they are sensed during execution. The reported ROIs are therefore treated as uncertain in-spection requirements rather than confirmed hazard locations. The UAV must inspect the reported ROIs while using its remaining flight budget to explore uncertain regions, collect measurements, and update its belief about the environment. This setting captures missions in which the initial reports provide only partial information and additional risk-relevant information may be revealed during execution. Previously unreported or newly sensed hazards can influence planning through the online measurement update and replanning mech-anism. Let the reported ROI set be denoted by R = {r1, r2, . . . , rNr },where each ROI ri is represented by a center location ci ∈ Ω.Here, ci is a reported location in the same spatial domain as x,but it is not assumed to be the true maximizer or center of ptrue .Instead, each ROI indicates a region where the prior belief of hazardous conditions should be elevated, while the true high-risk region may be displaced, broader, weaker, or absent. When available, each report may also include an uncertainty scale σi and a report strength wi, which describe the spatial precision and confidence of the ROI. The ROI reports are used to construct an initial belief field b0 : Ω → [0, 1], which represents the UAV’s prior estimate of the risk field before collecting new measurements. A typical construction combines a background risk level with local risk elevations around the 4

reported ROIs: 

b0(x) = σ logit (pbase ) + 

> Nr

# ∑

> i=1

wi exp 



− ∥x − ci∥22

2σ 2

> i

!

, (1) where σ (·) is the logistic function, pbase is a background risk probability, and wi and σi encode the strength and spatial uncertainty of ROI ri, respectively. This construction allows confident reports to induce concentrated high-risk regions, while uncertain reports produce broader and weaker belief patterns. Other prior models can also be used as long as they define an initial belief field over Ω.The UAV starts from a depot location x0 ∈ Ω and has a finite flight distance budget Dm, representing battery or mission endurance. The mission consists of a high-level route and a set of low-level trajectories. The route determines the order in which the UAV inspects the reported ROIs, possibly with additional auxiliary waypoints introduced to improve coverage. The trajectory between consecutive route waypoints must be dynamically feasible and must respect the allocated path budget. Let the route induce a sequence of edges E = {e1, e2, . . . , eK }, where each edge ek = ( ak, bk)

connects two consecutive route waypoints. We represent the UAV endurance constraint as a maximum allowable flight distance Dm, which may be derived from battery capacity, expected energy consumption, or mission-time limits. For each edge, this flight distance budget is divided into a nominal travel component ¯ Lk, which is the distance required to move between the edge endpoints, and a marginal exploration budget Bk,which is the additional distance available for sensing-oriented deviations from the direct connection. The resulting edge-wise path budget is given by Lk ≤ ¯Lk + Bk for k = 1, . . . , K, with the total mission budget satisfying 

> K

# ∑

> k=1

Lk ≤ Dm. (2) This defines the path length budget available for each low-level trajectory while preserving the total mission endurance constraint. Depot  

> Unknown
> Reported
> Routing
> Path Planning
> Fig. 2. Mission-level concept of operations for ROI-based UAV monitoring. The UAV starts from a depot, visits reported ROIs to satisfy inspection requirements, and uses remaining flight distance budget to explore areas where unreported or mislocalized hazards may exist.

Figure 2 shows the mission-level concept of operations. The depot represents the UAV’s base for launch, recovery, charging, data transfer, or coordination. Reported ROIs define inspection requirements that must be included in the high-level route, but they are not treated as confirmed hazard locations. Unknown or unreported hazard regions motivate exploration between reported ROIs. This motivates a bi-level framework in which route optimization determines the sequence of in-spection waypoints, while path planning converts each route segment into a dynamically feasible and informative trajectory. The remaining travel capacity after nominal route construction is interpreted as marginal exploration budget and is allocated to route segments for low-level informative planning. Routing Strategy    

> Initial VRP Pseudo Nodes Generation Modified VRP
> Path Budget Allocation
> Offline Path Planning
> Online Replanning
> Fig. 3. Algorithmic workflow of the proposed offline routing and online belief-driven replanning framework under imperfect and evolving risk infor-mation.

While Figure 2 illustrates the mission geometry, Figure 3 summarizes the algorithmic workflow. The offline layer first constructs an ROI-constrained route, augments the route with pseudo-nodes to improve spatial coverage, assigns edge-wise exploration budgets, and generates initial risk-aware B-spline trajectories. During execution, the UAV collects measure-ments, updates its grid-based belief field, evaluates replanning conditions, and replans the remaining trajectory when belief changes and remaining budget justify adaptation. In this way, the framework separates mission-level inspection requirements from trajectory-level information gathering while allowing newly acquired measurements to influence the remaining plan. During execution, the UAV collects measurements along its trajectory, allowing the mission-relevant risk information available to the planner to evolve over time. At time t, when the UAV is located at xt , it receives a sensor measurement yt

modeled as a noisy local observation of the underlying risk field: 

yt = μ0 + κ R 

> Ωt

K(∥xt − ξ ∥)ptrue (ξ )dξ

R 

> Ωt

K(∥xt − ξ ∥)dξ + εt , (3) where μ0 is a baseline signal level, κ is the signal strength, 

K(·) is a distance-dependent sensing kernel of the form 

K(d) = exp (−βsd2), Ωt ⊆ Ω is the local sensing region, and 

εt represents measurement noise. In this work, the continuous domain Ω is discretized into a finite set of grid points, and the risk belief is maintained at those locations. This grid-based representation approximates the local sensing integrals and supports efficient belief updates during execution. Other spatial representations, such as Gaussian processes, radial basis func-tions, particle maps, or adaptive meshes, could be used in place of the grid. The implementation details of the measurement and belief update model are given in Section VI-A. The 5

resulting belief field provides the information state used by the downstream planning and replanning layers. The goal of the mission is to inspect all reported ROIs while improving the UAV’s estimate of the continuous risk field. In evaluation, we measure this improvement using the reduction in Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the true risk field and the UAV belief: 

∆KL = DKL (ptrue ∥ b0) − DKL (ptrue ∥ bT ), (4) where DKL (· ∥ · ) denotes KL divergence and bT is the final belief after the mission. Since ptrue is unavailable to the UAV, 

∆KL is used only for evaluation and not as a planning objective. During execution, the planner instead relies on belief-based quantities available from the current belief and uncertainty estimates to generate and evaluate informative trajectories. The overall problem is therefore to design an integrated monitoring framework that: (i) constructs an ROI-constrained route that enforces inspection of reported regions, (ii) allocates the available flight distance budget across route segments to support exploration, (iii) generates dynamically feasible informative trajectories over the continuous domain, and (iv) updates and replans those trajectories online as new UAV measurements refine the belief field and reveal discrepancies between the prior reports and the sensed environment. The following sections describe the routing layer, the edge-wise exploration budget allocation, the offline informative path planner, and the online belief update and replanning strategy. V. H IGH -L EVEL ROUTING STRATEGY 

The high-level routing layer determines an inspection route that visits all reported ROIs while preserving flight budget for exploration over the continuous risk field. Unlike target-based routing problems that treat nodes as confirmed hazard locations, the required inspection nodes in this work represent reported ROI centers. To support both ROI inspection and exploration, the routing layer first solves a vehicle routing problem with ROIs, then augments the route with optional pseudo-nodes to improve spatial coverage, and finally assigns the remaining flight distance budget to route segments for edge-wise exploration. 

A. ROI-Constrained Route Optimization 

Let Nr be the number of reported ROIs and define Ir =

{1, 2, . . . , Nr} as the corresponding index set. The index 0 represents the depot node, and the set of all required routing nodes is given by I0 = Ir ∪ { 0}. Each ROI node i ∈ Ir is associated with the center location ci ∈ Ω, and the depot is located at c0 ∈ Ω. The distance between nodes i, j ∈ I0 is denoted by di j . The set of UAVs is denoted by M, where each UAV m ∈ M has a maximum flight distance budget Dm.We use a binary decision variable yi jm ∈ { 0, 1} to indicate whether UAV m travels directly from node i to node j.To eliminate subtours, we introduce a continuous auxiliary variable uim ∈ R+, representing the relative visit order of ROI node i by UAV m. The ROI-constrained VRP is formulated as min ∑

> m∈M

# ∑

> i∈I0

# ∑

> j∈I0

di j yi jm (5a) s.t. ∑

> m∈M

# ∑ 

> j∈I0
> j̸=i

yi jm = 1, ∀i ∈ Ir, (5b) 

# ∑ 

> j∈I0
> j̸=i

yi jm = ∑ 

> j∈I0
> j̸=i

y jim , ∀m ∈ M, ∀i ∈ I0, (5c) 

# ∑

> i∈I0

# ∑

> j∈I0

di j yi jm ≤ Dm, ∀m ∈ M, (5d) 

# ∑

> j∈Ir

y0 jm = 1, ∀m ∈ M, (5e) 

# ∑

> i∈Ir

yi0m = 1, ∀m ∈ M, (5f) 

u0m = 0, ∀m ∈ M, (5g) 1 ≤ uim ≤ | Ir|, ∀i ∈ Ir, ∀m ∈ M, (5h) 

u jm ≥ uim + 1 − | Ir|(1 − yi jm ), ∀m ∈ M, ∀i̸ = j ∈ Ir,

(5i) 

yi jm ∈ { 0, 1}, ∀i, j ∈ I0, ∀m ∈ M,

(5j) 

uim ∈ R+, ∀i ∈ Ir, ∀m ∈ M. (5k) Here, Dm denotes the total flight distance budget of UAV 

m. The VRP ensures that the high-level ROI route remains feasible within this budget. The objective in Equation (5a) minimizes the total route length. Equation (5b) ensures that each reported ROI is inspected exactly once, while Equa-tion (5c) enforces route continuity. Equation (5d) limits the route length for each UAV. Equations (5e) and (5f) require each route to start and end at the depot, and Equations (5g) to (5i) eliminate subtours using the Miller–Tucker–Zemlin formulation [26]. 

B. Pseudo-Node Route Augmentation 

The route obtained from the ROI-constrained VRP guar-antees inspection of the reported ROIs, but it may provide poor spatial coverage when the ROIs are clustered or unevenly distributed. Since the environment is represented as a contin-uous risk field, the path between ROIs can provide important sensing opportunities. To improve the spatial distribution of the route, we introduce pseudo-nodes as auxiliary coverage waypoints. These nodes are not hazard reports and do not in-troduce additional ROI inspection requirements. Instead, they are mission-design waypoints that can be added or removed depending on the desired coverage and available flight budget. Pseudo-nodes should improve coverage by drawing the route toward regions that are poorly represented by the current ROI route. We use a centroidal Voronoi tessellation (CVT) [27] procedure because it provides a simple way to distribute auxiliary points according to a chosen spatial density. By assigning larger density to regions farther from the existing route edges, the CVT update places pseudo-nodes in under-covered areas, as illustrated in ?? . Given a set of generators 

zi ∈ Ω, the Voronoi cell associated with generator zi is 

Vi = x ∈ Ω | ∥ x − zi∥2 ≤ ∥ x − z j∥2, ∀ j̸ = i . (6) In a standard CVT, each generator is updated to the centroid of its Voronoi cell 

zi = 

> R
> Vi

xρ(x)dx  

> R
> Vi

ρ(x)dx , (7) 6

where ρ(x) is a density function over the domain. With a uniform density, the resulting generators tend to be evenly distributed over Ω.To account for the current route structure, we use an edge-based density function that assigns higher weight to regions farther from the existing route edges. The intuition is that locations close to the current route are more likely to be sensed by trajectories generated along that route, whereas locations far from the route are more likely to remain under-covered. In the CVT update, each pseudo-node moves toward the weighted centroid of the region assigned to it. Therefore, if an assigned region contains many points far from the current route, its weighted centroid is pulled in that direction. This causes pseudo-nodes to move toward under-covered regions while keeping the reported ROI centers fixed. Let Eroute denote the set of edges in the current route. The density is defined as 

ρ(x) = αρ + βρ d(x, Eroute ), (8) where d(x, Eroute ) is the Euclidean distance from x to the closest route edge, and αρ , βρ > 0 are weighting parameters. Points farther from the current route therefore contribute more strongly to the weighted centroids in the CVT update. During the update, ROI centers are treated as fixed generators so that the required inspection locations remain unchanged, while only pseudo-nodes are moved. The resulting pseudo-nodes guide the augmented route toward under-covered regions with-out changing the reported ROI inspection requirements. After pseudo-node generation, the VRP is re-solved over the augmented node set Z = {ci}Nr 

> i=1

∪ P, where P is the set of pseudo-nodes. In the augmented VRP, both ROI centers and selected pseudo-nodes are included as route waypoints. The distinction is that ROI centers represent required inspection regions, whereas pseudo-nodes are mission-design waypoints introduced solely to improve route-level spatial coverage. Thus, pseudo-node visitation is mandatory only after the mission designer selects Np, and setting Np = 0 recovers the ROI-only route. The resulting route preserves ROI inspection while improving spatial coverage for exploration. Adding pseudo-nodes introduces a tradeoff between route-level spatial coverage and remaining marginal exploration budget. More pseudo-nodes can guide the route through under-covered regions and create more informative edge geometries, but they also increase the nominal route length and may reduce 

Bmarg . The number of pseudo-nodes Np is therefore treated as a mission-design parameter. In the experiments, we vary Np

to evaluate this tradeoff, including the ROI-only case Np = 0. 

C. Edge-Wise Exploration Budget Allocation 

After the augmented route is computed, the remaining flight distance budget must be assigned to individual route segments so that the path planner can use it for local exploration. Rather than giving the low-level planner a single global budget, we define an edge-wise budget for each route edge. This specifies the maximum trajectory length available on that edge and ensures that the local trajectory plans remain consistent with the mission-level flight distance budget. 

Algorithm 1 Edge-based CVT Pseudo-Node Generation 

Require: ROI centers {ci}Nr

> i=1

, current route edges Eroute ,domain Ω, number of pseudo-nodes Np, weights αρ , βρ 

> 1:

Initialize pseudo-nodes P = {p1, . . . , pNp } in Ω 

> 2:

for h = 1 to hmax do  

> 3:

Sample points S ⊂ Ω 

> 4:

Assign each sampled point to the nearest generator in 

{ci}Nr 

> i=1

∪ P 

> 5:

for each pseudo-node pℓ ∈ P do  

> 6:

Update pℓ using the weighted centroid in Equa-tion (7) with density Equation (8)  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Re-solve the VRP over the augmented node set Z 

> 10:

return augmented route and route edges Let E = {e1, . . . , eK } be the set of route edges after pseudo-node augmentation. Each edge ek = ( ak, bk) connects two con-secutive waypoints in the route. The nominal travel length ¯ Lk

represents the minimum feasible travel required to move from 

ak to bk. In the simplest case, ¯ Lk can be the Euclidean distance between the endpoints. For curvature-constrained vehicles, it can be computed using a kinematically feasible surrogate such as a Dubins shortest path length [28]. The total marginal budget available for exploration is 

Bmarg = Dm −

> K

# ∑

> k=1

¯Lk. (9) Thus, exploration does not use an additional budget outside the UAV endurance limit. Instead, it uses only the remaining distance budget after the augmented route waypoints have been connected by nominal feasible travel segments. Assuming 

Bmarg ≥ 0, this remaining budget is distributed across route edges using a line-segment Voronoi partition of the domain. This partition assigns each location in Ω to the route edge that is closest to it. Intuitively, an edge whose surrounding region covers a larger portion of the domain receives more exploration allowance, since trajectories along that edge are responsible for sensing a larger local area. The Voronoi region associated with edge ek is 

Vk = {x ∈ Ω | d(x, ek) ≤ d(x, el ), ∀l̸ = k} . (10) Here, d(x, ek) is the shortest distance from x to the finite line segment connecting ak and bk, rather than to the infinite line through the two endpoints. The scalar η gives the normalized position of the orthogonal projection of x along the segment: 

η = 0 corresponds to ak, η = 1 corresponds to bk, and 0 ≤

η ≤ 1 means the projection lies between the endpoints. If η <

0 or η > 1, the projection falls outside the segment, so the nearest point is the corresponding endpoint. For ek = ( ak, bk),the projection factor is 

η = (x − ak)⊤(bk − ak)

∥bk − ak∥22

, (11) 7

and 

d(x, ek) = 



∥x − ak∥2, η < 0,

∥x − bk∥2, η > 1,

∥x − (ak + η(bk − ak)) ∥2, otherwise .

(12) Let Ak be the area of Vk. A simple area-based allocation assigns 

Bk = Bmarg 

Ak

∑K 

> ℓ=1

Aℓ

. (13) More generally, the allocation may include a belief-dependent score sk computed over Vk. The score sk may be chosen as the average current belief, average uncertainty, or a weighted combination of risk and uncertainty over Vk. The resulting edge weight is ωk = Aksk, and the budget assignment is 

Bk = Bmarg ωk

∑K 

> ℓ=1

ωℓ

. (14) The resulting flight distance budget for edge ek is 

Lk ≤ ¯Lk + Bk. (15) This budget is passed to the low-level path planner, which gen-erates a dynamically feasible informative trajectory between ak

and bk within the assigned budget. VI. L OW -L EVEL INFORMATIVE PATH PLANNING AND 

ONLINE REPLANNING 

The high-level routing layer provides a sequence of route edges and an edge-wise budget for each segment. The low-level planner converts each route edge into a dynamically feasible trajectory that is informative with respect to the current belief field. Unlike the previous discrete hazard for-mulation, the planner operates over a continuous risk belief 

bt (x), which is updated during execution using streaming UAV measurements. This section presents the belief and sensing model, the B-spline trajectory representation, the offline edge-wise path planning problem, the replanning evaluation score, and the online replanning strategy. 

A. Sensor Model and Belief Representation 

The continuous domain Ω is represented by a finite set of grid points G = {g1, g2, . . . , gNg }, where each gi ∈ Ω is a grid location at which the risk belief is evaluated. At time 

t, the UAV maintains a belief probability bt (gi) ∈ [0, 1] and represents the same belief using the log-odds representation 

ℓt (gi) = logit (bt (gi)) = log 

 bt (gi)

1 − bt (gi)



. (16) The log-odds representation is commonly used in occupancy-grid mapping [29] because it converts a bounded probability into an unbounded real-valued quantity, making sequential measurement updates easier to express. The belief can be re-covered from the log-odds representation as bt (gi) = σ (ℓt (gi)) ,where σ (·) is the logistic function. The planner also maintains a logit-space variance vt (gi), which captures the uncertainty associated with the current belief estimate. When the UAV is located at xt , it receives a scalar mea-surement yt . The measurement is modeled as a noisy local observation of the underlying risk field. For belief prediction and update, we define the local update neighborhood 

Nt = i ∈ { 1, . . . , Ng} | ∥ xt − gi∥2 ≤ rupd , (17) and the sensing kernel 

Kti = exp  −βs∥xt − gi∥22

 , i ∈ Nt . (18) Here, Kti is the sensing weight from the executed UAV position 

xt to grid point gi, and rupd is the local update radius. Given the current belief, the predicted measurement is ˆyt = μ0 + κ ∑i∈Nt Kti bt (gi)

∑i∈Nt Kti 

, (19) where μ0 is the baseline signal level, κ is the signal strength, and βs controls the spatial decay of the sensor response. The belief is updated using an extended Kalman filter (EKF) in log-odds space. Let 

Hti = κKti bt (gi)( 1 − bt (gi)) 

∑ j∈Nt Kt j 

, i ∈ Nt , (20) be the linearized observation Jacobian with respect to the log-odds representation. The innovation variance is 

St = σ 2 

> y

+ ∑

> i∈Nt

vt (gi)H2

> ti

, (21) where σy is the measurement noise standard deviation. The Kalman gain for grid point gi is 

Gti = vt (gi)Hti 

St

, i ∈ Nt . (22) The log-odds representation and variance are updated as 

ℓt+1(gi) = ℓt (gi) + Gti (yt − ˆyt ), i ∈ Nt , (23) 

vt+1(gi) = vt (gi) − Gti Hti vt (gi), i ∈ Nt . (24) For grid points outside Nt , the belief and variance remain unchanged except for optional spatial diffusion. A lightweight spatial diffusion step may be applied after the local update to propagate measurement influence to nearby cells and reduce over-confident localization caused by sparse measurements. 

B. B-Spline Trajectory Representation 

For each route edge ek = ( ak, bk), the low-level planner generates a continuous trajectory from the start waypoint 

ak to the end waypoint bk. We parameterize the trajectory using a B-spline since it provides a smooth and differentiable representation suitable for constrained trajectory optimization. Let Ck = {ck,1, ck,2, . . . , ck,Nc } denote the control points for edge ek, and let r denote the B-spline order. The trajectory is written as 

pk(τ) = 

> Nc

# ∑

> i=1

Bi,r(τ)ck,i, τ ∈ [0,t f ,k], (25) where Bi,r(τ) are B-spline basis functions, τ is the trajectory parameter, and t f ,k is the final traversal time for edge ek.The derivatives of pk(τ) are used to impose vehicle motion constraints. We use a planar unicycle model as a reduced-order repre-sentation of UAV motion. This model captures the horizontal 8

motion constraints most relevant to the proposed planning layer, including forward speed and heading-rate limits, while avoiding the computational cost of full quadrotor dynamics. More detailed models could be used when attitude dynamics, thrust limits, or three-dimensional maneuvering are critical. Here, the unicycle abstraction is appropriate because the plan-ner operates at the path-planning level, assumes approximately constant-altitude monitoring, and relies on a lower-level flight controller to track the planned trajectory. Accordingly, the UAV is modeled using unicycle kinematics: 



˙x(τ)

˙y(τ)

˙θ (τ)

 =

v(τ) cos θ (τ)

v(τ) sin θ (τ)

u(τ)

 , (26) where x(τ) and y(τ) are the planar position coordinates, θ (τ)

is the heading angle, v(τ) is the speed, and u(τ) is the turn rate. For a B-spline trajectory, the corresponding speed, turn rate, and curvature are obtained from the first and second derivatives of pk(τ):

v(τ) = ∥ ˙pk(τ)∥2, u(τ) = ˙pk(τ) × ¨pk(τ)

∥ ˙pk(τ)∥22

, χ(τ) = u(τ)

v(τ) .

(27) Here, χ(τ) denotes curvature, and × denotes the scalar cross product in two dimensions. The trajectory length is 

L(pk) =    

> Ztf,k
> 0

∥ ˙pk(τ)∥2dτ. (28) 

C. Offline Edge-Wise Informative Path Planning 

The offline low-level planner generates an initial trajectory for each route edge using the belief field available before executing that edge. For notational consistency, this belief is denoted by bt , where t represents the planning time for the current edge. Let Gk ⊆ G denote the set of grid points assigned to edge ek, for example through the edge-wise Voronoi partition described in Section V-C. The path planner receives the edge endpoints (ak, bk), the current belief bt , and the edge-wise budget L(pk) ≤ ¯Lk + Bk.To construct an informative trajectory, we use a belief-weighted expected detection objective over the grid points assigned to the edge. This objective is a differentiable planning surrogate that encourages sensing near high-belief regions while remaining compatible with constrained B-spline opti-mization. Let Tk = {τ1, τ2, . . . , τNs } be the set of sampling times along the candidate trajectory, and define sk, j = pk(τ j). Here, j in-dexes trajectory samples, while i indexes grid points. For grid point gi, let di j = ∥sk, j − gi∥2 and define the smooth sensing weight Ki j = exp (−βsd2

> i j

). The same exponential kernel form is used for belief updates and trajectory evaluation: Kti is evaluated at the executed UAV position xt , whereas Ki j is evaluated at candidate trajectory sample sk, j. The expected signal level induced by risk at gi is 

μ1(di j ) = μ0 + κKi j . (29) Although the belief update uses the continuous scalar mea-surement yt , the path objective evaluates whether a candidate trajectory is likely to produce informative sensor responses by thresholding the predicted signal distribution. Using the detection threshold yth , the probability of receiving an informa-tive detection response associated with grid point gi at sample location sk, j is modeled as 

πi j = 1 − ΦN

 yth − μ1(di j )

σy



, (30) where ΦN (·) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. Since μ1(di j ) is defined through the smooth sens-ing weight Ki j , the resulting detection probability remains differentiable with respect to the trajectory sample locations, preserving differentiability for IPOPT-based constrained opti-mization. Using a standard independent response approximation across samples, the cumulative informative-response score associated with gi along the path is 

Sdet (gi | pk) = 1 −

> Ns

# ∏

> j=1

(1 − πi j ). (31) The expected detection score of the trajectory is then 

Ψk(pk; bt ) = ∑

> gi∈Gk

bt (gi)Sdet (gi | pk). (32) This score is not a posterior divergence objective. Direct opti-mization of the evaluation metric ∆KL defined in Equation (4) would require access to ptrue , which is unavailable during execution, while exact posterior information-gain optimization would substantially increase the complexity of the constrained B-spline problem. The proposed score therefore serves as a differentiable surrogate that biases the trajectory toward high-belief regions with strong predicted sensor response. The endpoint velocities vk,0 and vk, f define the de-sired entry and exit velocities for edge ek. The constants 

vmin , vmax , umin , umax , and χmax define the speed, turn-rate, and curvature bounds. The offline path planning problem for edge 

ek is formulated as 

C ⋆ 

> k

,t⋆  

> f,k

= argmin   

> Ck,tf,k

−Ψk(pk; bt ) (33a) s.t. pk(0) = ak, pk(t f ,k) = bk, (33b) ˙pk(0) = vk,0, ˙pk(t f ,k) = vk, f , (33c) 

vmin ≤ v(τ j) ≤ vmax , ∀τ j ∈ Tk, (33d) 

umin ≤ u(τ j) ≤ umax , ∀τ j ∈ Tk, (33e) 

− χmax ≤ χ(τ j) ≤ χmax , ∀τ j ∈ Tk, (33f) 

L(pk) ≤ ¯Lk + Bk. (33g) The first two constraints enforce the edge endpoints and endpoint velocities. The next three constraints impose speed, turn-rate, and curvature limits at the sampled trajectory points. The final constraint enforces the edge-wise budget from the high-level routing layer. 

D. Information-Gain Score for Replanning 

Before describing the online replanning trigger and accep-tance rule, we define the expected information-gain score used only to evaluate candidate replans. The expected detection score in Equation (32) is used as the primary objective for 9

offline trajectory optimization. During online execution, how-ever, replanning also requires deciding whether a candidate trajectory is sufficiently better than the remaining portion of the current trajectory. For this acceptance test, we use a separate risk-weighted expected information-gain score based on the current belief and logit-space variance. For a candidate trajectory pk, let Ki j denote the sensing kernel between sample pk(τ j) and grid point gi, and let N j

denote the set of grid points within the local update neighbor-hood of pk(τ j). For ℓ ∈ N j, Kℓ j = exp (−βs∥pk(τ j) − gℓ∥22).Here, j indexes trajectory samples, while i and ℓ index grid points. The normalized linearized measurement sensitivity is defined as 

Hi j = κKi j bt (gi)( 1 − bt (gi)) 

∑ℓ∈N j Kℓ j

, i ∈ N j. (34) For grid points outside N j, we set Hi j = 0. The accumulated information for grid point gi is 

Ii(pk) = 1

σ 2 

> y

# ∑    

> τj∈Tk:i∈Nj

H2

> i j

. (35) The expected information-gain score is 

Jk(pk; bt , vt ) = ∑

> gi∈Gk

bt (gi) 12 log (1 + vt (gi)Ii(pk)) . (36) This score gives greater value to trajectories that sense regions with both high-risk belief and high remaining uncertainty. It is not used as the primary offline B-spline optimization objective; instead, it evaluates whether an online candidate re-plan provides additional expected value relative to the current remaining trajectory. 

E. Online Belief Update and Replanning 

The offline trajectory is executed while the UAV continu-ously collects measurements and updates its belief. After each measurement, the belief update in Equations (23) and (24) is applied to the local neighborhood of the UAV. The updated be-lief is then used to determine whether the remaining trajectory should be replanned. Let bref denote the belief snapshot used as the reference for the current trajectory. The cumulative belief change over the edge grid is measured as 

∆bt = 1

|Gk| ∑

> gi∈Gk

|bt (gi) − bref (gi)| . (37) A replanning opportunity is considered only when two con-ditions hold. First, the belief change must satisfy ∆bt ≥ εb,where εb is the belief-change threshold. This prevents replan-ning from being triggered by small measurement fluctuations. Second, sufficient flight distance budget must remain to reach the edge endpoint while still allowing useful exploration. Let 

Dk,rem be the remaining flight distance budget for edge ek,and let ¯ Lk,rem denote the nominal feasible travel length from the current UAV position to the edge endpoint. The remaining budget Dk,rem is updated by subtracting the distance already flown on the current edge from the edge-wise budget ¯ Lk + Bk.Replanning is allowed only if 

Dk,rem ≥ ¯Lk,rem + δ , (38) where δ > 0 is the minimum exploration margin required to justify replanning. Together, these conditions ensure that replanning occurs only when the belief has changed mean-ingfully and enough path budget remains to act on the new information. When these conditions are satisfied, a new B-spline tra-jectory is generated from the current UAV position to the edge endpoint using the updated belief field. The replanning problem has the same structure as Equation (33), but its start state, remaining length budget, and belief field are replaced by their current execution-time values. The new trajectory is accepted only if its expected information gain improves over the remaining portion of the current trajectory: 

Jk(pnew ; bt , vt ) ≥ Jk(pold ,rem ; bt , vt ) + δψ , (39) where δψ ≥ 0 is an improvement threshold. If the candidate is accepted, the remaining trajectory is replaced by the new B-spline; if it is rejected, the UAV continues executing the exist-ing trajectory. After each replanning evaluation, regardless of acceptance, the reference belief bref is reset to the current belief to avoid repeated triggers from the same measurement-induced belief change. The acceptance criterion is therefore deliber-ately separated from the offline path objective. The offline optimizer uses the belief-weighted expected detection score to generate feasible informative trajectories, while the online acceptance test uses the risk-weighted expected information-gain score to decide whether replacing the remaining trajectory is justified under the updated belief and variance. 

Algorithm 2 Online Belief Update and Replanning for Edge 

Require: Edge ek = ( ak, bk), grid Gk, belief bt , variance vt ,flight distance budget ¯ Lk + Bk 

> 1:

Generate initial B-spline trajectory by solving Equa-tion (33)  

> 2:

Set bref ← bt 

> 3:

while the UAV has not reached bk do  

> 4:

Execute the current trajectory for one sampling step  

> 5:

Collect measurement yt 

> 6:

Update ℓt , bt , and vt using Equations (23) and (24)  

> 7:

Compute belief change ∆bt using Equation (37)  

> 8:

if ∆bt ≥ εb and Dk,rem ≥ ¯Lk,rem + δ then  

> 9:

Replan a B-spline from the current state to bk 

> 10:

if Jk(pnew ; bt , vt ) ≥ Jk(pold ,rem ; bt , vt ) + δψ then  

> 11:

Replace the remaining trajectory with pnew  

> 12:

else  

> 13:

Continue executing the existing trajectory  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

Reset bref ← bt 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

return updated belief field and executed trajectory The procedure in Algorithm 2 is applied sequentially to each route edge. After completing edge ek, the final belief becomes 10 

the initial belief for planning and executing the next edge 

ek+1. The offline planner is recovered as a special case of this procedure by disabling the replanning trigger after the initial edge-wise B-spline trajectories are generated. This provides a natural baseline for evaluating the benefit of online replanning. VII. N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS 

This section evaluates the proposed framework through numerical simulations. The experiments are organized into three parts. Section VII-B evaluates the effect of pseudo-node augmentation on route-level spatial coverage. Section VII-C analyzes the behavior and computational cost of the online re-planning layer under a representative scenario. Section VII-D compares all four path planning strategies across 48 scenario configurations varying the number of total clusters nc, hidden clusters nh, and pseudo-nodes Np.

A. Experimental Setup 

All simulations are conducted in a bounded two-dimensional domain Ω = [ 0, 1000 ] × [0, 1000 ] m2, with the depot node located at (0, 0) m. The domain is discretized into a uniform grid for belief representation, sensor updates, and metric evaluation. The true risk field is generated synthetically as a mixture of Gaussian risk clusters. For each scenario, nh

clusters are hidden from the initial prior and are not reported to the planner. The remaining clusters define reported ROIs, whose center locations are perturbed by Gaussian noise before constructing the initial belief field. This produces imperfect prior information that is spatially imprecise and incomplete. The true risk field is used only for measurement generation and post-mission evaluation, and is not available to the planner. The combination of nc, nh, and Np gives 3 × 4 × 4 = 48 scenarios. For each scenario, we run 100 independent random trials. The same scenario instances are used for all compared methods so that performance differences reflect the planning strategy rather than differences in the generated risk fields. The main simulation parameters are summarized in Table I. The vehicle routing problem is solved using PyVRP [30]. The B-spline trajectory optimization and online replanning problems are solved using IPOPT [31]. All reported quantitative results are averaged over 100 independent random trials. Simulations were run on a laptop computer with a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-1360P CPU. 

B. Effect of Pseudo-Node Route Augmentation 

This experiment evaluates whether pseudo-node augmen-tation improves the spatial coverage of the high-level route. The routing experiments are performed in Ω = [ 0, 1000 ] ×

[0, 1000 ] m2 with randomly generated reported ROI centers. The UAV has a total flight distance budget of Dm = 5000 m. We compare three routing strategies: an ROI-only route, which visits only the reported ROI centers and the depot; node-based CVT augmentation, which improves spatial waypoint distri-bution without explicitly considering the current route edges; and edge-based CVT augmentation, which biases pseudo-node placement toward regions under-covered by the current route edges.                                                         

> TABLE I SIMULATION PARAMETERS
> Parameter Value
> Domain size 1000 ×1000 m 2
> Number of trials 100 UAV flight distance budget Dm5000 m Number of total risk clusters nc{6,8,10 }
> Number of hidden clusters nh{1,2,3,4}
> Cluster spread σcluster 160 m Number of reported ROIs Nrnc−nh
> Number of pseudo-nodes Np{0,1,2,3}
> Prior location noise σnoise 100 m Sensor signal strength κ0.8 Sensor kernel decay βs0.005 Measurement noise std σy0.10 Kernel truncation radius rupd 20 m Belief-change threshold εb0.01 Speed range [vmin ,vmax ][0.5,10 .0]m/sTurn-rate range [umin ,umax ][−2.0,2.0]rad /sCVT density weight αρ0.1 CVT density weight βρ1.0 Detection threshold yth 0.6

Route coverage is evaluated using the edge coverage ratio (ECR) and edge density variance (EDV). The ECR is defined as ECR = Nc

Ng

, (40) where Nc is the number of grid cells intersected by at least one route edge and Ng is the total number of grid cells. The EDV is defined as EDV = 1

NgNg

# ∑

> i=1

(Xi − ¯X)2, ¯X = 1

NgNg

# ∑

> i=1

Xi, (41) where Xi is the number of route edges passing through grid cell 

i. ECR measures the fraction of the environment intersected by the route, while EDV characterizes how unevenly route-edge density is distributed across the grid. Figure 4 illustrates a representative routing example. The ROI-only route visits the required ROI centers but may leave large portions of the domain under-covered. Node-based CVT improves the spatial spread of auxiliary waypoints, while edge-based CVT explicitly accounts for the current route structure and places pseudo-nodes toward regions farther from existing route edges. The resulting augmented route provides more spa-tially distributed route segments for downstream informative path planning. The quantitative comparison is summarized in Table II. The results are averaged over 100 randomized trials. The edge-based CVT strategy achieves the highest ECR, increasing route coverage from 0 .0992 for the ROI-only route to 0 .1901. This indicates that the augmented route intersects a substantially larger fraction of the domain. The EDV values increase as pseudo-nodes are added, reflecting a larger number of route-edge intersections across the grid. These results show that pseudo-node augmentation increases route coverage compared with the ROI-only route. In partic-ular, edge-based CVT provides the largest ECR by biasing pseudo-node placement toward regions that are farther from existing route edges. This broader route-level coverage is beneficial for exploration since the low-level planner receives route segments that span a larger portion of the environment. 11 0 500 1000 

> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(a)   

> 0500 1000
> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(b)   

> 0500 1000
> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(c)   

> 0500 1000
> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(d)                              

> 0.128
> 0.042
> 0.101
> 0.082 0.151
> 0.142 0.132
> 0.119
> 0.102
> ROI Pseudo Node Route
> Fig. 4. Example of high-level routing strategies. (a) ROI-only routing visits only the reported ROI centers. (b) Node-based CVT introduces pseudo-nodes to improve spatial waypoint distribution. (c) Edge-based CVT biases pseudo-nodes toward regions farther from the existing route edges, improving route-level coverage of under-covered areas. (d) Edge-wise allocation of the remaining flight-distance budget assigns additional exploration allowance to route segments for downstream path planning. TABLE II ROUTE COVERAGE AND EDGE -D ENSITY METRICS FOR PSEUDO -N ODE
> PLACEMENT STRATEGIES
> Method ECR EDV
> ROI-only route 0.0992 ±0.0245 0.1177 ±0.0305 Node-based CVT 0.1246 ±0.0244 0.1472 ±0.0302 Edge-based CVT 0.1901 ±0.0358 0.2367 ±0.0495

C. Representative Online Replanning Behavior 

This experiment evaluates the online belief update and replanning component under a representative nominal scenario with nc = 8, nh = 3, and Np = 3. We compare two variants of the proposed framework: an offline optimized planner and an online replanning planner. In both variants, the risk-aware B-spline trajectory optimization problem is solved using IPOPT, and both share the same high-level route, pseudo-node augmentation, edge-wise budget allocation, and initial B-spline trajectory. The only difference is that the online variant updates the belief field during execution and replans the remaining trajectory when the belief-change and budget conditions are satisfied. Belief-estimation performance is measured using the KL reduction metric introduced in Equation (4). In the grid-based implementation, DKL (ptrue ∥b) is computed as the average cell-wise Bernoulli KL divergence over G , with both ptrue and b

clipped to [ε, 1 − ε] to avoid numerical singularities. Larger 

∆KL values indicate greater improvement in the UAV’s belief estimate. Table III summarizes the offline and online replanning per-formance for the representative nominal scenario with nc = 8, 

nh = 3, and Np = 3. Online replanning improves the mean KL reduction from 0 .4953 to 0 .6037, corresponding to a 21 .9% improvement over the offline optimized planner. This result shows that updating the belief field during execution and adapting the remaining trajectory can provide a substantial improvement over executing the initially optimized trajectory without replanning. An important observation is that the improvement is consis-tent rather than being driven by a small number of favorable trials. In the 100 trial online replanning experiment, the online planner improves KL reduction in every trial, with no negative improvement cases. This suggests that the online update and replanning mechanism is robust to variations in the generated risk fields, rather than only benefiting particular random instances.                       

> TABLE III OFFLINE AND ONLINE REPLANNING PERFORMANCE FOR THE
> REPRESENTATIVE SCENARIO nc=8, nh=3, AND Np=3
> Metric Offline Online
> ∆KL 0.4953 ±0.0666 0.6037 ±0.0757

The improvement achieved by online replanning is driven by the interaction between hidden risk clusters, belief-change triggering, and EIG-based replan acceptance. The offline optimized planner allocates sensing effort using the belief field available before execution. Since this initial belief is constructed from reported ROIs, it does not explicitly rep-resent hidden clusters. As the UAV collects measurements during execution, observations near hidden clusters can induce sufficiently large belief updates to exceed the belief-change threshold εb, triggering a replanning evaluation.                  

> TABLE IV ONLINE REPLANNING ACTIVITY AND PER -C ALL RUNTIME
> Metric Value
> Triggered replanning evaluations per mission 46 .3±23 .7Accepted replans per mission 18 .4±9.2Mean IPOPT replan call time 1.11 ±1.11 s Total IPOPT replan time per mission 39 .35 ±22 .73 s

A triggered replanning evaluation does not necessarily re-place the current trajectory. Instead, the candidate trajectory is accepted only when its expected information gain exceeds that of the remaining portion of the current trajectory. This EIG-based acceptance criterion makes online replanning selective rather than purely reactive. For the same representative sce-nario, Table IV shows that an average of 46 .3 replanning eval-uations are triggered per mission, but only 18 .4 are accepted. This indicates that many triggered replanning opportunities are filtered out, preventing unnecessary trajectory changes while 12 

still allowing the UAV to redirect sensing effort when new measurements reveal informative regions. The trigger and acceptance statistics also show that the online planner does not rely on continuous re-optimization. On average, fewer than half of the triggered replanning evaluations are accepted. This behavior is desirable since a low threshold alone could cause frequent reactive replanning, while the EIG-based acceptance test filters candidate trajectories that do not offer enough additional value. Therefore, the online layer acts as a selective adaptation mechanism: it reacts to meaningful belief changes, but only modifies the trajectory when the proposed path is expected to improve information gathering. From a computational perspective, the cost of online re-planning is better characterized by the per-call optimization runtime than by the total simulation wall time. Total wall time can include execution-loop overhead, belief updates, logging, and implementation-dependent costs, whereas the per-call IPOPT runtime directly reflects the cost of solving the trajectory optimization problem. Across the 100 trials in the representative online replanning experiment, the mean IPOPT replan call time was 1 .11 ± 1.11 s, with a median of 0 .81 s. The total IPOPT replan time per mission was 39 .35 ± 22 .73 s on average. Although online replanning introduces additional optimiza-tion calls during execution, these calls are not made at every time step. The belief-change trigger identifies candidate re-planning opportunities, and the EIG-based acceptance criterion further filters them before replacing the current trajectory. The median runtime below one second indicates that most replan-ning calls are computationally light, while the larger standard deviation and worst-case runtime reflect occasional harder nonlinear trajectory-optimization instances depending on the current state, remaining budget, and local belief structure. Overall, the runtime statistics support the use of online replan-ning as a tractable adaptation layer rather than a continuously running global optimizer. All IPOPT replanning calls in the reported experiments returned feasible candidate trajectories, and candidates that did not improve the expected information-gain score were rejected by the replanning acceptance test. These results suggest that the online replanning layer is com-putationally tractable for receding-horizon mission adaptation, although embedded real-time implementation would require further optimization and hardware-specific validation. 

D. Path Planning Performance Across Scenarios 

This experiment evaluates path planning performance after the high-level route has been computed. For each route edge, we compare four execution strategies: straight-line traversal, lawnmower coverage [32], the proposed offline optimized B-spline planner, and the proposed online replanning planner. The straight-line baseline directly connects consecutive route waypoints and therefore represents a minimum-travel strategy with limited exploration and no belief-field use. The lawn-mower baseline uses the assigned path budget to sweep a local region around each route edge, representing a non-adaptive geometric coverage strategy that uses the marginal exploration budget but does not use the belief field. The proposed offline optimized planner solves the risk-aware B-spline trajectory optimization problem using the belief field available before execution, but then executes the resulting trajectory without replanning. The proposed online replanning planner starts from the offline optimized trajectory, updates the belief field using streaming measurements, and replans the remaining trajectory when the belief-change and budget conditions are satisfied. This comparison separates the effects of marginal budget use, geometric exploration, belief-aware trajectory optimiza-tion, and online adaptation. The straight-line baseline evaluates direct route traversal with minimal use of the marginal ex-ploration budget. The lawnmower baseline evaluates whether using the assigned path budget for additional geometric cov-erage improves belief-field estimation without belief-aware planning. The offline optimized planner evaluates the benefit of belief-aware B-spline trajectory optimization under the initial belief field. The online replanning planner evaluates the additional benefit of adapting the remaining trajectory as new measurements are collected. All path planning comparisons use the same KL reduction metric and grid-based Bernoulli KL implementation described above. Figure 5 illustrates representative trajectories of the four methods on the same environment instance. Orange diamonds mark reported ROI centers used as routing nodes, and red crosses indicate true cluster centers hidden from the planner. The online replanning method visibly deviates from the nom-inal offline trajectory near hidden cluster regions, redirecting the remaining path as streaming measurements update the belief field. In contrast, the offline optimized, lawnmower, and straight-line methods follow fixed trajectories that do not respond to in-flight measurements. To evaluate robustness across different environment struc-tures, we vary the total number of clusters nc ∈ { 6, 8, 10 }, the number of hidden clusters nh ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4}, and the number of pseudo-nodes Np ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3}, as summarized in Table I. This gives 3 × 4 × 4 = 48 scenario configurations. Table V reports the KL reduction for all four methods across these scenarios, where Online and Offline denote the proposed online replanning planner and the proposed offline optimized B-spline planner, respectively, and Lawnmower and Straight denote the two non-belief-aware baselines. For each scenario, the same generated risk fields, reported ROIs, routes, and flight distance budgets are used across all methods to ensure a fair comparison. The results in Table V show a clear ordering of performance across the four methods. Averaged over all 48 scenario con-figurations, the online replanning planner achieves the largest mean KL reduction, 0 .6043, followed by the offline optimized planner with 0 .5214, the lawnmower baseline with 0 .4433, and the straight-line baseline with 0 .4068. Thus, online replanning improves the average KL reduction by 15 .9% relative to the offline optimized planner, 36 .3% relative to lawnmower coverage, and 48 .6% relative to straight-line traversal. The offline optimized planner also improves over the straight-line and lawnmower baselines, showing that belief-aware trajectory optimization provides a substantial benefit beyond geometric coverage alone. The ordering of the four methods reflects the incremental 13 0 500 1000 

> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(a) Online Replanning   

> 0500 1000
> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(b) Offline   

> 0500 1000
> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(c) Lawnmower   

> 0500 1000
> x (m)
> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> y (m)

(d) Straight            

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Hazard Probability
> True cluster (reported) Reported ROI center True cluster (unreported) Pseudo-node
> Fig. 5. Example trajectories for four path planning strategies. The background shows the true hazard probability field ptrue , and the black line indicates the UAV trajectory. Orange diamonds indicate reported ROI centers, and red crosses indicate true hidden cluster centers. (a) Online replanning, (b) offline optimized, (c) lawnmower, and (d) straight-line paths. 0123
> Number of pseudo-nodes
> 0.25
> 0.30
> 0.35
> 0.40
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> Average KL reduction
> Online
> Offline
> Lawnmower
> Straight
> Fig. 6. Average KL reduction as a function of the number of pseudo-nodes Np,averaged across all scenarios. Error bars indicate standard deviations across scenarios. Increasing Npgenerally improves performance, while the proposed online replanning method consistently achieves the highest KL reduction.

use of planning capabilities and available mission resources. Straight-line traversal provides the minimum-travel baseline and uses little of the marginal exploration budget. Lawnmower coverage improves over straight-line traversal by using the assigned budget for additional geometric coverage, but it does not exploit the belief field. The offline optimized planner further improves performance by using both the marginal path budget and the initial belief field to allocate sensing effort toward informative regions. The online replanning planner achieves the best performance since it additionally incorpo-rates streaming measurements and redirects the remaining trajectory when the updated belief reveals mislocalized or previously unreported risk. The lawnmower baseline provides a useful intermediate comparison since it isolates the value of geometric exploration from belief-aware planning. Its improvement over the straight-line path shows that using the marginal path budget for addi-tional spatial coverage is beneficial. However, the gap between lawnmower coverage and the offline optimized planner shows that coverage alone is not sufficient. Since the lawnmower pattern is not conditioned on the belief field, it can spend sensing effort in regions that are less informative for risk field estimation. In contrast, the optimized B-spline planner uses the current belief to bias the trajectory toward higher-value sensing regions, which explains its consistent improvement over the non-belief-aware baselines. The scenario-level trends across nh, nc, and Np provide additional insight into when each component is most useful. Increasing nh makes the prior belief less complete as alarger portion of the true risk field is not represented by reported ROIs. This setting is particularly challenging for the offline optimized planner, which can only exploit the initial belief. Online replanning is better suited to this case since measurements collected during execution can reveal discrepancies between the prior and the true field, allowing the remaining trajectory to be redirected. Increasing Np generally improves the performance of both offline and online planning since pseudo-nodes create route segments that span a broader portion of the environment, giving the low-level planner more opportunities to use the exploration budget. The effect of nc is more nuanced: as the number of total clusters increases, risk becomes more spatially distributed, which can also benefit ge-ometric baselines, but the online planner remains the strongest method as it can still adapt to local belief updates. Overall, these results demonstrate that the proposed frame-work improves monitoring performance through complemen-tary route-level, trajectory-level, and execution-time mecha-nisms. Pseudo-node augmentation improves route-level cover-age, offline B-spline optimization improves sensing efficiency by using the prior belief field, and online replanning further improves belief accuracy by adapting the remaining trajectory as new measurements are collected. VIII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This paper presented an integrated routing and online infor-mative path planning framework for UAV hazard monitoring under imperfect and evolving information. Reported high-risk areas were modeled as uncertain ROIs rather than confirmed hazard locations, enabling the UAV to satisfy required inspec-tion tasks while estimating a broader continuous risk field. The proposed framework combines ROI-constrained routing, pseudo-node route augmentation, edge-wise exploration bud-get allocation, risk-aware B-spline trajectory optimization, and online belief-driven replanning. 14 

TABLE V PATH PLANNING COMPARISON ACROSS 48 SCENARIOS WITH MEAN ± STANDARD DEVIATION OVER 100 TRIALS . T HE BEST -PERFORMING METHOD IN EACH SCENARIO IS SHOWN IN BOLD .

nc nh Np Online Offline Lawnmower Straight 6 1 0 0.6556 ± 0.0736 0.5569 ± 0.0745 0.4492 ± 0.0669 0.4128 ± 0.0717 6 1 1 0.6162 ± 0.0628 0.5343 ± 0.0812 0.4513 ± 0.0630 0.4113 ± 0.0738 6 1 2 0.6386 ± 0.0640 0.5357 ± 0.0825 0.4562 ± 0.0653 0.4160 ± 0.0687 6 1 3 0.6280 ± 0.0601 0.5331 ± 0.0633 0.4797 ± 0.0621 0.4397 ± 0.0564 6 2 0 0.6552 ± 0.0734 0.5630 ± 0.0857 0.4470 ± 0.0743 0.3818 ± 0.1138 6 2 1 0.6428 ± 0.0694 0.5417 ± 0.0699 0.4431 ± 0.0582 0.3864 ± 0.0882 6 2 2 0.6233 ± 0.0713 0.5411 ± 0.0824 0.4454 ± 0.0625 0.4112 ± 0.0764 6 2 3 0.6039 ± 0.0753 0.5325 ± 0.0600 0.4585 ± 0.0585 0.4125 ± 0.0740 6 3 0 0.5851 ± 0.0771 0.4862 ± 0.1121 0.3775 ± 0.0965 0.3287 ± 0.1363 6 3 1 0.5719 ± 0.0647 0.5022 ± 0.0941 0.4065 ± 0.0896 0.3457 ± 0.0921 6 3 2 0.6029 ± 0.0612 0.5196 ± 0.0726 0.4233 ± 0.0711 0.3742 ± 0.0754 6 3 3 0.6067 ± 0.0656 0.5445 ± 0.0684 0.4510 ± 0.0640 0.4058 ± 0.0739 6 4 0 0.4711 ± 0.0605 0.4046 ± 0.1893 0.2467 ± 0.1464 0.2532 ± 0.1310 6 4 1 0.5383 ± 0.0618 0.4545 ± 0.1471 0.3333 ± 0.1123 0.3129 ± 0.1304 6 4 2 0.5683 ± 0.0744 0.4970 ± 0.1268 0.3838 ± 0.1044 0.3484 ± 0.1159 6 4 3 0.6213 ± 0.0692 0.5278 ± 0.0916 0.4060 ± 0.0697 0.3670 ± 0.0817 8 1 0 0.5940 ± 0.0757 0.5293 ± 0.0743 0.4574 ± 0.0699 0.4154 ± 0.0767 8 1 1 0.6416 ± 0.0733 0.5328 ± 0.0593 0.4584 ± 0.0513 0.4206 ± 0.0544 8 1 2 0.6312 ± 0.0741 0.5331 ± 0.0673 0.4842 ± 0.0854 0.4437 ± 0.0857 8 1 3 0.6371 ± 0.0756 0.5378 ± 0.0678 0.4985 ± 0.0931 0.4632 ± 0.0925 8 2 0 0.6141 ± 0.0727 0.5264 ± 0.0801 0.4438 ± 0.0662 0.4257 ± 0.0818 8 2 1 0.5909 ± 0.0711 0.5277 ± 0.0719 0.4494 ± 0.0632 0.3978 ± 0.0661 8 2 2 0.6256 ± 0.0712 0.5242 ± 0.0645 0.4528 ± 0.0642 0.4137 ± 0.0633 8 2 3 0.6117 ± 0.0661 0.5201 ± 0.0628 0.4639 ± 0.0550 0.4237 ± 0.0535 8 3 0 0.5579 ± 0.0659 0.4902 ± 0.0779 0.3963 ± 0.0807 0.3650 ± 0.0936 8 3 1 0.6109 ± 0.0732 0.5167 ± 0.0848 0.4069 ± 0.0700 0.3709 ± 0.0744 8 3 2 0.6102 ± 0.0711 0.5130 ± 0.0682 0.4318 ± 0.0525 0.3960 ± 0.0616 8 3 3 0.6037 ± 0.0757 0.4953 ± 0.0666 0.4313 ± 0.0635 0.3977 ± 0.0658 8 4 0 0.5619 ± 0.0632 0.4800 ± 0.0895 0.3771 ± 0.0899 0.3481 ± 0.0945 8 4 1 0.6036 ± 0.0700 0.5020 ± 0.0823 0.3882 ± 0.0772 0.3582 ± 0.0743 8 4 2 0.6171 ± 0.0630 0.5221 ± 0.0667 0.4183 ± 0.0647 0.3770 ± 0.0650 8 4 3 0.6099 ± 0.0739 0.5343 ± 0.0715 0.4474 ± 0.0613 0.4073 ± 0.0616 10 1 0 0.6030 ± 0.0692 0.5366 ± 0.0626 0.4875 ± 0.0606 0.4582 ± 0.0655 10 1 1 0.6171 ± 0.0714 0.5346 ± 0.0690 0.5017 ± 0.0725 0.4790 ± 0.0734 10 1 2 0.6117 ± 0.0628 0.5332 ± 0.0630 0.5030 ± 0.0648 0.4730 ± 0.0637 10 1 3 0.6612 ± 0.0623 0.5549 ± 0.0842 0.5334 ± 0.0979 0.5060 ± 0.0948 10 2 0 0.6112 ± 0.0606 0.5133 ± 0.0610 0.4570 ± 0.0490 0.4180 ± 0.0638 10 2 1 0.5933 ± 0.0687 0.5156 ± 0.0521 0.4566 ± 0.0457 0.4195 ± 0.0497 10 2 2 0.6276 ± 0.0643 0.5191 ± 0.0542 0.4672 ± 0.0483 0.4355 ± 0.0481 10 2 3 0.6333 ± 0.0682 0.5286 ± 0.0517 0.4878 ± 0.0552 0.4610 ± 0.0571 10 3 0 0.6012 ± 0.0733 0.5249 ± 0.0869 0.4490 ± 0.0644 0.4330 ± 0.0570 10 3 1 0.6046 ± 0.0681 0.5261 ± 0.0754 0.4552 ± 0.0500 0.4108 ± 0.0630 10 3 2 0.6119 ± 0.0763 0.5284 ± 0.0578 0.4746 ± 0.0505 0.4402 ± 0.0591 10 3 3 0.6039 ± 0.0633 0.5344 ± 0.0667 0.4938 ± 0.0762 0.4608 ± 0.0767 10 4 0 0.6512 ± 0.0689 0.5496 ± 0.0983 0.4476 ± 0.0837 0.4082 ± 0.0862 10 4 1 0.6104 ± 0.0676 0.5102 ± 0.0794 0.4585 ± 0.0773 0.4245 ± 0.0816 10 4 2 0.5970 ± 0.0660 0.5176 ± 0.0722 0.4623 ± 0.0660 0.4228 ± 0.0675 10 4 3 0.6158 ± 0.0726 0.5414 ± 0.0739 0.4767 ± 0.0817 0.4419 ± 0.0859 

Numerical experiments demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Pseudo-node augmentation improved route-level spatial coverage compared with ROI-only routing, while the offline informative planner outperformed straight-line and lawnmower baselines by exploiting the prior belief field for sensing-aware trajectory generation. Online replan-ning further improved estimation performance by adapting the remaining trajectory as streaming measurements updated the belief field. Across 48 scenario configurations, online replanning achieved a 15.9% improvement in average KL reduction relative to the offline optimized planner, showing the value of online adaptation when prior hazard information is incomplete or mislocalized. Several limitations remain. First, the numerical experiments used synthetic, fixed ground-truth risk fields to enable con-trolled comparison across planning methods. Although this setup is useful for isolating the effects of routing, informative planning, and online replanning, it does not fully capture time-varying hazards, complex terrain, or real sensor arti-facts. Second, the current numerical experiments focuse on a single UAV setting with a centralized belief representation and does not address communication constraints, decentralized coordination, or conflict resolution among multiple UAVs. Third, pseudo-node selection and edge-wise budget allocation are treated as mission-design components rather than fully adaptive decisions during execution. Finally, the sensor model is intentionally simplified and should be validated against higher-fidelity sensing models or real UAV monitoring data. 15 

Future work will address these limitations by extending the framework to explicitly time-varying risk fields, adaptive pseudo-node selection, online budget reallocation, and coor-dinated multi-UAV missions with shared or distributed belief updates. We also plan to evaluate the approach with higher-fidelity sensing models, more realistic vehicle and environ-mental constraints, and real-world UAV monitoring data. CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. REFERENCES [1] S. M. S. Mohd Daud, M. Y. P. Mohd Yusof, C. C. Heo, L. S. Khoo, M. K. Chainchel Singh, M. S. Mahmood, and H. Nawawi, “Applications of drone in disaster management: A scoping review,” Science & Justice ,vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 30–42, 2022. [2] B. Mishra, D. Garg, P. Narang, and V. Mishra, “Drone-surveillance for search and rescue in natural disaster,” Computer Communications , vol. 156, pp. 1–10, 2020. [3] M. Erdelj, M. Kr´ ol, and E. Natalizio, “Wireless sensor networks and multi-UAV systems for natural disaster management,” Computer Net-works , vol. 124, pp. 72–86, 2017. [4] T. Wang, R. Qin, Y. Chen, H. Snoussi, and C. Choi, “A reinforcement learning approach for UAV target searching and tracking,” Multimedia Tools and Applications , vol. 78, no. 4, pp. 4347–4364, Feb 2019. [5] J. Choi and M. Z. Li, “Bandit-enabled dynamic vehicle dispatch and routing in hazardous environments,” in AIAA AVIATION FORUM AND ASCEND 2025 , 2025. [6] J. Choi and M. Z. Li, “Autonomous air-ground vehicle operations optimization in hazardous environments: A multi-armed bandit approach,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.08217 [7] T. Calamoneri, F. Cor` o, and S. Mancini, “Management of a post-disaster emergency scenario through unmanned aerial vehicles: Multi-depot multi-trip vehicle routing with total completion time minimization,” 

Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 251, p. 123766, 2024. [8] S. Kiesel, E. Burns, C. Wilt, and W. Ruml, “Integrating vehicle routing and motion planning,” Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling , vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 137–145, May 2012. [9] Y. Warsame, “Integrating location-routing with task and motion plan-ning,” in 2020 IEEE 16th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) , 2020, pp. 329–334. [10] J. Choi, G. Stagg, C. K. Peterson, and M. Z. Li, “Bi-level route optimization and path planning with hazard exploration,” in 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2025, pp. 3403–3410. [11] B. Brown, W. Wei, R. Ozburn, M. Kumar, and K. Cohen, “Surveillance for intelligent emergency response robotic aircraft (sierra)- vtol aircraft for emergency response,” in AIAA Infotech @ Aerospace , Kissimmee, Florida, Jan. 2015. [12] K. R. Jensen-Nau, T. Hermans, and K. K. Leang, “Near-optimal area-coverage path planning of energy-constrained aerial robots with applica-tion in autonomous environmental monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1453–1468, 2021. [13] J. Choi, M. Li, and M. Z. Li, “Adaptive robust markov decision process for wide-area surveillance with collaborative combat aircraft,” in AIAA SCITECH 2026 Forum , Orlando, FL, Jan. 2026. [14] H. Shakhatreh, A. H. Sawalmeh, A. Al-Fuqaha, Z. Dou, E. Almaita, I. Khalil, N. S. Othman, A. Khreishah, and M. Guizani, “Unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs): A survey on civil applications and key research challenges,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 48 572–48 634, 2019. [15] W. P. Coutinho, M. Battarra, and J. Fliege, “The unmanned aerial ve-hicle routing and trajectory optimisation problem, a taxonomic review,” 

Computers & Industrial Engineering , vol. 120, pp. 116–128, 2018. [16] K. Sundar and S. Rathinam, “Algorithms for routing an unmanned aerial vehicle in the presence of refueling depots,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 287–294, 2014. [17] S. G. Manyam, K. Sundar, and D. W. Casbeer, “Cooperative routing for an air–ground vehicle team—exact algorithm, transformation method, and heuristics,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engi-neering , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 537–547, 2020. [18] E. Stump and N. Michael, “Multi-robot persistent surveillance planning as a vehicle routing problem,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering , 2011, pp. 569–575. [19] S. Chowdhury, O. Shahvari, M. Marufuzzaman, X. Li, and L. Bian, “Drone routing and optimization for post-disaster inspection,” Comput-ers & Industrial Engineering , vol. 159, p. 107495, 2021. [20] G. J. Lim, S. Kim, J. Cho, Y. Gong, and A. Khodaei, “Multi-uav pre-positioning and routing for power network damage assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 3643–3651, 2018. [21] M. Popovi´ c, J. Ott, J. R¨ uckin, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Learning-based methods for adaptive informative path planning,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 179, p. 104727, 2024. [22] J. Binney and G. S. Sukhatme, “Branch and bound for informative path planning,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2012, pp. 2147–2154. [23] R. Marchant and F. Ramos, “Bayesian optimisation for informative continuous path planning,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2014, pp. 6136–6143. [24] M. Popovi´ c, T. Vidal-Calleja, G. Hitz, J. J. Chung, I. Sa, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “An informative path planning framework for uav-based terrain monitoring,” Autonomous Robots , vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 889–911, 2020. [25] J. R¨ uckin, L. Jin, and M. Popovi´ c, “Adaptive informative path planning using deep reinforcement learning for uav-based active sensing,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2022, pp. 4473–4479. [26] C. E. Miller, A. W. Tucker, and R. A. Zemlin, “Integer programming formulation of traveling salesman problems,” J. ACM , vol. 7, no. 4, p. 326–329, Oct. 1960. [27] Q. Du, V. Faber, and M. Gunzburger, “Centroidal voronoi tessellations: Applications and algorithms,” SIAM Review , vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 637–676, 1999. [28] L. E. Dubins, “On curves of minimal length with a constraint on average curvature, and with prescribed initial and terminal positions and tangents,” American Journal of Mathematics , vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 497–516, 1957. [29] S. Thrun, “Probabilistic robotics,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 52–57, 2002. [30] N. A. Wouda, L. Lan, and W. Kool, “PyVRP: a high-performance VRP solver package,” INFORMS Journal on Computing , vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 943–955, 2024. [31] A. W¨ achter and L. T. Biegler, “On the implementation of an interior-point filter line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming,” 

Mathematical programming , vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 25–57, 2006. [32] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning for robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1258– 1276, 2013.